chore: add sync strategies (#437)
eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies: docs/wiki/EL/el-architecture.md

🔗 [EVM Code in Geth]( https://github.com/ethereum/go-ethereum/blob/master/core/vm/evm.go#L90)

##### State Sync

All execution clients require an up‑to-date world state to validate and build blocks. To bootstrap a new node's current state, clients leverage Ethereum’s DevP2P subprotocols: `eth/*` (wire protocol) for block headers, bodies, and receipts, and `snap/1` for creating state snapshots. Using these sub-protocols, clients can choose between two sync strategies, **full sync** or **snap sync**.  The difference between the snap synced node and a full block-by-block synced node is that a snap synced node started from an initial checkpoint that was more recent than the genesis block.

Let's look at how the flows of both **full sync** and **snap sync** work.

### Full Sync

> Full Sync trades absolute trustlessness for time and resources. You replay every block and transaction from genesis to tip, rebuilding the state trie step by step:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Full Sync trades absolute trustlessness for time and resources. The client replays every block and transaction from genesis to tip, rebuilding the state trie step by step:
```

Reviewer: I would maybe add that full sync is the default naive strategy and because it's starting from genesis, it's not sustainable for the future (4444)

Author: solid point! added 4444 context in latest commit https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/pull/437/commits/2bde312198c716340ca067a292936d77415c1ae6

Other thoughts I didn't include in the PR:
On top of 4444, once we get statelessness, syncing should be significantly sped up, since each block will have execution witnesses, containing each account and storage slots accessed, and block validation can just run txs against an in-memory state trie created from those accessed accounts and storage slots.
^^ maybe too early to add this context to the sync wiki section but def going to be a game changer

This method guarantees maximal security but can take days on mainnet and consumes significant CPU, disk, and network resources.

### Snap Sync
Snap Sync reconstructs the pivot block's state by fetching only the trie leaves (accounts and storage slots) plus Merkle proofs, then separately downloading any needed contract bytecode, and finally rebuilding the tries locally:
1. Choose a recently finalized block as your pivot block.
2. Over eth/*, request that block’s header via `GetBlockHeaders` to learn its stateRoot. 
3. Fetch headers up to the pivot via `eth/*`, so you know which state root to target.
4. Download the leaves of the pivot block's world state trie and account storage trie in chunks.
   - **Accounts**: uses `GetAccountRange` to pull contiguous world state trie leaf values.
   - **Storage**: uses `GetStorageRanges` to pull consecutive storage slot leaf nodes for each account.
5. Send `GetByteCodes` for every code hash found in the account bodies to get back the contract code for that account
6. Locally insert every fetched leaf into a fresh trie, verifying each batch against the pivot root via Merkle proofs.

> After step 6, we have a snapshot of the pivot block's state. However, the blockchain is also progressing at the same time and invalidating some of the regenerated state data. This means it is also necessary to have a healing phase where errors in the state are fixed.  During healing, the client walks the reconstructed trie and verifies that it hashes to the pivot block’s stateRoot. Any missing or inconsistent trie nodes or bytecode blobs are fetched using targeted snap requests. Healing ensures the final state is complete and cryptographically valid, even if parts of the snapshot were stale, incomplete, or assembled from mixed sources.  

Reviewer: One small thing I would highlight here is that snapshot has a specific database like format, different from state merkle

Author: no doubt, added this context in https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/pull/437/commits/2bde312198c716340ca067a292936d77415c1ae6

- [Engine Api Spec](https://github.com/ethereum/execution-apis/blob/main/src/engine/paris.md#payload-validation) • [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20250318111700/https://github.com/ethereum/execution-apis/blob/main/src/engine/paris.md#payload-validation)
- [Engine API: A Visual Guide](https://hackmd.io/@danielrachi/engine_api) • [archived](https://web.archive.org/web/20241006232802/https://hackmd.io/@danielrachi/engine_api)
- [Engine API | Mikhail | Lecture 21](https://youtu.be/fR7LBXAMH7g)

> - ["Snapping Snap Sync: Practical Attacks on Go Ethereum Synchronising Nodes" (ETH Zurich)](https://appliedcrypto.ethz.ch/content/dam/ethz/special-interest/infk/inst-infsec/appliedcrypto/research/TavernaPaterson-SnappingSnapSync.pdf)

Reviewer: also eth.org has these https://ethereum.org/en/developers/docs/nodes-and-clients/#execution-layer-sync-modes

Author: nice source, added as well https://github.com/eth-protocol-fellows/protocol-studies/pull/437/commits/2bde312198c716340ca067a292936d77415c1ae6
